  "transcript": "Look at these trees. These trees are from the Witcher 4 tech demo and I think they look amazing. They are super performant. They can run on a PS5 with 60 fps with these kind of dense trees. They are skeletal meshes. They are voxilized at the distance. That's how you get the performance. And they will even move, you know, in a distance. So, it's super cool. And in this video, I'm going to show you how you can import your own custom trees, stylized, realistic, it doesn't matter. your own custom trees with this workflow into Unreal. We also have like a surprise at the end of the video. Uh a super cool collaboration of sorts. This also took me a couple of weekends to like troubleshoot and find out why it wasn't working and everything. So please subscribe. So why do you even want these trees? They are nanite. Uh so they will just work basically. You don't have to think about lods or anything like that. They are skeletal. You have a new wind system that actually follows the skeletal. So, it's much more much easier and more performant like than the VPO wind system we we usually have with the you know the foliage doing the same thing over and over and you you can do cool stuff with that as well but it's super unperformance so you have to disable it after a certain distance and so on. This is much more performant and much more complex. Uh super cool system and we've seen it similar systems in like Alan Wake 2. I found a video some time ago but I couldn't find it right now but here's a PDF from the Alan Wake 2 tech something. So they have a similar like GPU based skinning with all the foliage vegetation and this came out like 2 years ago or something. So yeah, super cool and I think Unreal was inspired by this that you could do this on such a big scale or I don't know how it went but it's super cool that Alan Wake already did it and I I think they are Finnishbased so it's close to Sweden so it's uh feels good. If you imagine like a tree that has a skeleton you can open up like a bunch of gameplay possibilities with this. So imagine like a bending tree or something and you can just have somebody climbing on top of the tree and it would be pretty easy because you have controls of all the bones and everything. So like attaching sockets or whatever could be much easier than before than recalculating the VPO distance of whatever you know destructible foliage uh more interactable for example all the branches are instances so you can like maybe cut off a branch or something much easier than before because you have controls of all the skeleton super cool system so let's dive in. So this kind of started as like a personal weekend project. I spent all my free time the last couple of weeks and finally arrived at the solution. I debugged a bunch in Unreal. I followed the schemas. I did a bunch of things. I won't bore you with the details. I had like a couple of videos on it like the process and I've done much more outside filming this obviously as well. And I had some help with uh from control in a discord server. He sent me a working sample that works for him. He also figured out the wind system. That's another another thing we won't talk about today. So, thank you so much, Control. That way didn't unfortunately work for me as it didn't comply with the USD schema. So, I bet like Epic in the future will kind of break that. I'm betting. Um because they already have like a bunch of like silent errors and so on. But super helpful and super nice guy. But if we fast forward a couple of weekends and all my free time, uh, then we finally arrived at something that actually worked with skeleton meshes. And following the the USD schema did work, sometimes did not work. And you kind of need to have all of these things in the right order in the right place. But I'm going to show you everything now step by step. All right. So, let's talk about the solution. So, first step is to download Unreal 5.7. I don't know if you need the source build or not. Uh but this path as I'm showing on screen here, uh this needs to be included into your environment variables. You can just go to search, search for environment variables, and this is going to pop up. And you can do it on the top here with the users or down at the system. Doesn't matter really. Uh and then just add this to your location of Unreal 5.7. So I'm having it in the H drive here, UEI 5.7, etc. So make sure to change that as well so it matches your configuration. So in this directory just make sure that you have this file as well as this file. If you don't you can copy paste them from the Unreal source build from GitHub and I'll probably link something or you can just Google like source build Unreal. Make sure you have these files then you're good to go. You can do this with Blender. You can do this with other applications. I'm going to show you how to do it in Houdini for now. And maybe I can create like a plug-in or something for Blender. That would be good. Or if somebody else takes this video and what you want to do is to just drop a configure primitive like this. Go down to schema, apply schema, and make sure you have nanite assembly external refi, nanite assembly root API, and nanite assembly scale binding API because these are loaded from the environment variable that we just set. Uh, so these are loaded into Houdini now. And this will be the same for Blender, Maya, any DCC or DDC that supports USD because this is a USD workflow. So we're going to go from our application to USD into Unreal. When you export from Unreal outside in USD, these schemas, they are not imported or exported. So when you try to import the same file won't work. So they are kind of breaking in their own API as well for import export, which is uh great. and no documentation as well, but I have said that like probably a thousand times right now. So anyway, make sure you have these perfect then we are going to yeah set up a tree basically uh because now you are configured with the USD stuff. So I'm going to go back to my prepared tree here. So that's OBJ in in Houdini. So this is basically like how to define geometry in Houdini. So if you're not sure about Houdini, it doesn't matter like think Blender, think anything else. So this is just a mesh of a leaf. Uh nothing exciting. However, we need to make this a skeletal mesh. This is because if I go to Unreal here and if I go to procedial vegetation editor sample assets, I go to any one of these and we can see here instances you can see we have a static mesh but we also have the skeletal mesh. So if I open one of these, you have the root bone here. So this is super important because now we can control the leaf here. And this is how the wind works and how it actually attaches to the twigs and so on. And this took a long time to figure out. If we take a look at my uh import here, you have the SK character. Uh but it's just my leaf here. It's really ugly my working in prototype, but you you can see we have the same same setting here. I probably should have it point up as well. So it's a bunch of small improvements we need to do here. But we have the root bone. Everything is working. We also have the working tree, right? So this is my amazing looking tree. Yeah, I know. We have all the joints. You can like turn them around. It's looking great. Everybody's happy. And if I search on uh search uh for not that, but yeah, I guess that uh we have assembly. So here we can see we also have the instances with the SK character my leaf. Okay. So if we begin with the leaf, so the each leaf or each twig, branch, whatever you want to instance on anything, it actually needs a root bone. So if we take a look at this leaf for example for one of the prototypes or one of the examples you can see it has a root bone and and it's bound to this root bone. So this for example if I search for assembly as I've done here you can see all of these actually have skeletal meshes right. So I don't know if this also has no but you can actually nest them as well. So it's super super cool system. Uh so this is a twig but it's bound to this one root. So you can actually make more complex shapes as well. and um like you don't have to nest them if you don't want to, right? So maybe that saves some performance as well. This this was actually something that took a long time to figure out that you needed like a skeletal mesh even for each leaf. Now it's super obvious. Now we can go ahead. So now you know what we're trying to do here. So in Houdini, I have my really amazing looking leaf here. And I'm just adding a point here. It's a small small point. Small small small. And I'm going to rename it to root. So I have now a name route for this uh joint because now it's actually a joint. And I'm just binding this leaf mesh into this. And now you can see we can deform it. So nope. Uh if I select this, press enter. Now we can rotate the leaf the same as we did in Unreal. So from the rig doctor, it just converts it into a joint. This will be the same if you like bind it in. You just take a mesh and in Blender and you just bind it to one joint. It's going to be the same, right? So now I have a skeleton here from the rig doctor and we also have the skinned mesh. So this is the skinned mesh and I'm also setting on the primitive level the name and part and we have the leaf mesh out. So that's what's important right here. So we have the skeleton and we have the skinned mesh. That's it. No nothing more. So this bone deform and stuff that's only to kind of see if it's deforming correctly. So next part is to actually create our tree. So, if you saw the last video, we created a shitty tree um or we created an amazing tree and it was made with side effects labs as well. So, that's something I'm using. Uh go to the GitHub and you can see how to actually install and download everything with uh side effects lab. So, if I right click here, I have the labs uh everything with labs basically. So, I'm I'm using their tree. You can see here tree controller hierarchy everything labs tree basically just to get something. You don't have to use that. You can make your own. You can use L systems. You can do whatever you want. So I just have this basic trunk with some noise on it. And this right output is the skeleton or curve. And this left one is the mesh. So here we have a trunk. And I'm setting the name to be OS which is trunk and my tree/ trunk. And this goes out trunk. I'm not sure if I use that honestly. So uh maybe maybe don't think about that. We also have the branches. And you can see here we are spawning the branches and they are going all over the place. And out from this tree branch generator we are uh getting the curve. So this is the curve for the entire tree and I'm resampling. I'm fusing them. So you can see here for example they are disconnected. So I'm fusing them based on a distance. I don't think we actually need to do this because we can instance each branch basically on top of the tree. uh then you won't get like a super nice um transition between them. I have some friends that have figured this out though that I'm going to talk about later. So stay tuned for that. Then we are reordering the curve. This is necessary because I'm I'm not sure what we're renaming the root bone into root. Uh so if we take a look at the points you can see we have the root here and then we have the rig doctor to create with all the joint. So you can see the name here we have the root as root and all else are called something else like joint something a number perfect and here we have our skeleton. So this this null here we are going to import into solaris like Houdini's USD workflow. So take a notice of all the nulls I've like shown you before as well and go back in the video if in case you missed it. So these we are going to import into the USD context basically and yeah then we are binding this mesh using Houdini's bind and this will be like the weight paint stuff you do in Blender or Maya or whatever we're just doing it like procedural here in Houdini. Here we can see how we can bend. So if I take a joint here we can bend and you can see how it deforms correctly. So yeah this is this is great. And if I take a lower one here everything on top follows as well. So that's great. And we we want our leaves, right? So I just uh yeah, that's better. So if we go back to our mesh here, we have our tree and we want our leaves. So right here we have our tree simple leaf only only the mesh basically and we have this tree leaf generator. So that's also from labs. So this is going to generate where the leaves can be and that's great. But why are we not like including this in the skeletal and like binding them to the skeleton? And this is because we want them as instances. So we have the this branches and the trunk and we're binding it to the skeleton as like a character as anything else. But the leaves we want to instance in this new kind of tree way as uh Unreal has done it. So how we're going to do that is using some USD magic in the import that Unreal can actually um translate. So Unreal is placing all the leaves on top of the branches. But we still want to see how we can do our tree here in Houdini. Right. So this is my this is my amazing tree I have right here. And I'm super happy with this tree. So I'm I'm taking the mesh of all the leaves here. So only the mesh of the leaves and I'm converting them to points. So these are all the points from the meshes. I don't think I get rotation here, but that's fine. I'm going to fix that another time and it won't be an issue. And we are taking the skeletal from the tree and we are just converting like a a name here from the joint name uh and saying okay this is not called name anymore this is called joint name. So we can actually see this in the geometry spreadsheet. We're doing something super cool here. So whenever we have all of our leaves here we want to find which joint is the closest one in the skeleton. So if we take here for example this leaf and it's probably this one right? So we are transferring all the attributes based on a radius here. So all of these points now that are the leaves have a joint name that is the closest one. So if we see yeah you can see these changing basically. So that's super cool. So whenever we're going to like bend the tree and so on even though they are instances they are going to follow the the tree as we saw in uh in Unreal here. So if I open the the awesome tree here. So if I bend anything here, all of these leaves, even though they are instances, are actually following, which is super cool. And we're doing this with an attribute in USD, not by binding anything like we did with the with the trunk, for example, that we actually bound to the to the skeleton like the regular character way if if you may. So yeah. So after that, we can skip this one. I'm just setting like the uh the part is the leaf on all of these points here and the name is leaf. That's it. So now we have the points leaf here. This null. So this is al also an export. So take note of that. Yeah. So the leaves points we have we have the skinned mesh. It's this one. So this is skinned to the skeleton, right? We we bent it before like like this. So that's working. And we also have the leaf skeleton which is only the let me actually remove this. We have the leaf skeleton which is one single root bone. And we have the leaf mesh as well. Uh that's kind of it. So now we are prepared to move into the Solaris workflow. So the next step okay so the next step is that we are moving into like the USD context. So Houdini has Solaris which is the USD context. Blender and so on doesn't really have that. So make sure you check your like DDC or dcc whatever it's called uh your application how it actually is working with USD. So it might be in Blender for example that you're actually just exporting with a script or something and that's it. So if I go back here we can see that we have the stage and stage is the USD context. So if we begin with our leaf again these are called lops as well but it's not important. We are importing our character which is just a leaf and we have the animated pose the rest geometry and the pose but basically we're importing our leaf and the skeleton with this one node here. Uh what's important here and this is the same for any basically uh application that you're using for USD is the hierarchy as you can see here down below in the geometry spreadsheet. So you see that we have the character which is the leaf and we have a bunch of values and so on and these are the ones that are important for importing into Unreal. So I'm going to talk more about that. So we have imported our uh leaf. We also have imported our truck uh with the same soft character import. So we have both of these which is great. And if I expand this a little bit, you can see because we set like the the s at path and so on, we have all of these branches separately. Uh we're not using that right now, but we could if in case we wanted to instance a bunch of things. So that's also super cool. We also have like the different primitive types X form scale root mesh and these are USD types. So these will be the same in Blender as they are in um Houdini, Maya, whatever. So uh and a quick note on that for example this instancer that would be a geometry nodes in blender for example and you can check more blender actually has uh I can actually show you right now. So if you go to this website for example uh if you are using blender you can actually see like the x form and scope what is that and how is that uh used in blender. So the point instancer for example is geometry nodes. Yeah. So all of the like different applications have their own translated uh use case from USD. So to import, export and to how to work with basic. So check this out if you're using Blender and you might also get ideas for how to implement this in Blender. I think a Python script might be the easiest, but that will be for the future. Okay. So we have our trunk and we have our leaf as well. So if we just focus on the trunk for now and you can see by following the line basically. So we have our tree and it's important with the root of awesome tree and we have a scaled root and under the scale root we have the meshes all of them animation and actually the skeleton right yeah okay so we have our tree and now comes one of the most important nodes here so we need to define this top node here so if I select this top one you can see how it changes so now it's a component now it's an the kind is assembly so these are like USD attributes so this needs to The assembly it needs to be X form. Uh the primitive needs to be defined. It's already in X form but set it to define and we need to apply this schema Nite assembly root API. So if you remember we have these three APIs that are imported from Unreal. So we need to use this root API and this should only be on the root uh as you can imagine and this has nothing to do with trees roots you know it's the root of the assembly. So the assembly route needs to be on the on the top null or empty or whatever you are calling it. So great we have done that and all of these can be applied with API in Houdini or even uh in Blender and so on. So yeah I won't say that anymore now. Uh then we have a edit properties and this is only applied to this primitive/ awesome tree. So that that's the top one we have the slash here and this is the awesome tree. So what we're doing here is we are setting it to a skeletal mesh and we are setting it to the skeleton. So we're applying Unreal Nanite assembly skeleton. We're pointing this entire route has the skeleton of this one, right? So we're setting the skeleton of this assembly to this skeleton. And we're saying, hey, this is not a static mesh. This is a skeleton mesh. And that's all you need. And how you do that in Houdini is by clicking edit properties. You can click here from USD. You can search for nanite, right? And you can see that we already have these guys on the top here, but then you're actually just dropping them below here. I I've already done it so I won't do it again. And then you click apply or accept and then these fields will pop up here. Cool. Uh and then if we go to our leaf here because after that we are merging with the leaves basically. So if we take the leaf side then we are importing our leaf. Perfect. And we also have this scale route because this is a skeleton. So if you're importing something and you don't have the scale routt, you're doing something wrong and you have the skeleton for the leaf which is the one one little joint. So here we have something interesting. We have the tree instancer which is a leaf instancer but whatever. Uh we're pointing this to aent tree leaf instancer and we are also including these out points if you remember all the points of the leaves. So not the leaves themselves. So we are taking this skinned skinned leaf basically and we are putting it on all of the points that we imported. So if we take a look at this you can see that we have yeah we have the leaves and and the rotation is wrong but I don't care right now. Uh we need to fix that obviously. So it's a external sub and I point them to the points and I pipe in this skinned leaf. Everybody's happy. Perfect. Then we do the same we we apply a API schema uh the nanite assembly scale binding API to the leaf instancer. So this is just some magic but you can see down here awesome tree leaf instancer. So the instancer itself needs to have this scale binding API uh because unreal needs to know like yeah this instancer and all of these points what should they be bound to you know what we prepared like each leaf should be bound to uh the closest joint basically. Yeah. Then afterwards, we're just setting the bind joint weights here. And I'm just setting it to one. You can do this like super granular and stuff. This one underneath here is called bind joints. So what you want here is basically a string list of uh all the points. For example, we might have like 400 points here. So if all of them are bound to root, you should write root root root root root 400 times with the separator of space or a a string array. And the easiest why I haven't written like root here or whatever joint name 400 times is because I did the script instead. So this script is using this Unreal Nite assembly bind joints. And yeah, it's basically doing what I said there. It's setting this guy with the correct closest point according to what we piped in with the the points that we had. So I can show you that in case you forgot. So if we go back to leaves here, you can see the joint name we have for all the points. So we're using this attribute to set these on all of the leaves basically. Cool, cool, cool. Everybody understand? Perfect. And yeah, so this is how this looks. Uh so you can copy paste that. So here you find the joint name and you set this to this guy by doing this and some more checks in case something goes wrong. Cool. Uh right. Then we merge. It's important also to have the correct structure in USD. So you can see here that we have the X form like the top root node. Then we have a leaf instancer. Then we also have outside like the branch or the trunk uh skeletal root thing with all the meshes inside and the skeleton inside. And the leaf instancer here has everything. We have the primaril nanite assembly bind joints. And we set this to this full list. Right. So leaf 362 is bound to joint 95. Great. Seems good. And yeah, that's also cool. Like we don't need this to be the length of the same instancer. It could be 1.0. All of them are bound like the same amount. Basically the bind joint weights. It can be a single one, right? That works. It can also be 413 and that will be the same as one. But if you want to bind each leaf to multiple joints, you can have it like multiply by two. The length can be for the bind joint weights to like 826 in length, right? So you can bind each leaf to multiple this one 90% and that one 10% in case you want like smoother whatever. Nobody's going to see that probably, but that's something you can do. It's supported by the code I saw in the code. Uh so just know that. Cool. We merge and then we export. So when I export here, I click save to disk. I also use flatten stage. It's probably good to flatten the stage. I'm not sure if we go then to Unreal here. We take a look at our content and import. Let's see. Let's see. Let's see if we can import this guy. All right. So, this was test for USDA. So, USDA is a ASKI format. So, you can actually open this with a uh with a notepad for example. So, this is the full file. So, in case you need to troubleshoot anything, you can actually see here the uniform token assembly mesh type skeleton mesh and the relation and so on. So this could be really good if you're developing like a plug-in for Blender for example. Please somebody do that. I don't know if I have the energy for it cuz see all the joints and everything. So and it's not that much you know it's like a thousand rows or something lines I mean. So uh you can do USDA or you can do USD and that's more performant. So I'm actually going to reexport it to USD. So test see test for USD. Perfect. And we go to Unreal and test USD form. Perfect. Import is looking great. I have not not made any like changes here. So, import and it's working. So, no uh test form. I haven't touched materials at all. That's another step as well. But that's the regular like USD materials. But now you can see we have the SK character, our uh leaf. We also have the skeleton for the leaf. Same for the trunk and like the branches. And we have our assembly which is this one. So, if I open it up this one, you can see it was the same as before. And if I rotate this, you have all the leaves and everything and everything is following. If I search for you get 43 instances, I can double click this character and I can move this. Perfect. Perfect. And it it's also working with like voxil. No, it's down here. I think vauil no uh nanite. Yeah. So shape preservation. Just press voxalize. Apply. So now whenever we are far away we are going to get that voxalized look. So maybe I can even do it here. Yeah, you can see here. So it's supporting this uh voxal uh super performant thing. Uh and that's also supporting like the skeletal uh which is super cool. So yeah uh that's kind of it. I also forgot to mention so you need actually need some settings in Unreal. So let me show you that two things you need. Um R.nite.allow allow assemblies needs to be one and interchange feature flags import USD needs to be zero. So change these in the default engine. So whenever you create a Unreal project you have a config directory. So just go into that and double click on the default uh enginei and change uh or add these under yeah I don't think it matters where but just add the basically yeah renderer settings. That's one thing. You also need to enable the some USD plugin, but not all of them. So, if I go to plugins, yeah, you can see here the USD core USD importer. I don't think we need this. Uh, but these two at least. You don't want the interchange open, not that one. So, that's it. So, now we can actually drag out our amazing tree here. Uh, test four skeleton meshes. I save awesome tree. Wow, looking amazing, right? No materials, not anything. Cool, cool, cool. You can also open the schema. That's also a good thing to know. The one in Unreal resources, etc., as you see here on the screen. And you can read more about like the root API we did here. So, we set this mesh type to uh skeleton for example, and we set the skeleton. You can also use this uh external riff API. Uh, and this needs to be an absolute path inside Unreal. So, you can point like this point for example, this X form because it it only needs to be X forms. Now you know what an X form is and this works great. Uh so you you can just use this if you want to. The nice thing about using USD instancers instead of separate X forms is that whenever you are including like this leaf, it just got imported, right? You you saw how everything just worked magically. Whenever you're using the other one like the external ref API, you can point to a skeletal mesh that you already have imported, but in case you move that or something, everything would break. So you have to reimpport that, reexport, reimpport everything. And I don't think you can actually set this inside Unreal. So I don't use this at all. I think you can reuse this with the point instancer as well. So that might work. I just wanted you to know. And here you can see the scale binding API as well. Cool, cool, cool. So now for the really exciting part, Natsura. So what you're seeing on screen here is a screenshot from Unreal. Over the last couple of days, I've been in talks with the guys at Natsura. Awesome people. They are kind of making a speed tree but much better inside of Houdini. Super cool guys. And they are now already implemented with some of my help which was super cool. This workflow into uh Unreal. It's super easy. It's like one press of a button like everything we did now uh with their plug-in for Houdini. And I'm probably going to make more videos about this because this is what I'm going to use for my project. And I actually reached out to them like half a year ago after I saw George presentation. So they implemented this like in a day now. And yeah, it's looking amazing and really similar to what the Witcher guys are doing. If you want like this super highly realistic trees that actually grows realistically like you have the simulation part, you have the manual part and take a look at their videos and the website instead of me explaining because it's a super cool system and it's more like a speed tree replacement but you have the full power of Houdini behind it in case you want it. If you are more like artist oriented, it actually opens up Houdini in like a more simpler interface. So you don't have to touch anything Houdini if you don't want to. You can just play around with like the branches and all the stuff. You can actually download this today and try it out. Yeah. So I'm super excited for that. This is what I'm going to use. Take a look at their website. Yeah. They have a bunch of cool stuff. So in case you don't want to worry about like all the schemas and all the things, just use this instead. They are really fast and yeah, super nice people. So make sure to check it out. So the next steps for me would be mainly like the windwork. That's only a JSON file. Control has this already working from speed tree. Uh I'm not going to use speed tree, but it's just a JSON file for the wind. So it's pretty easy I think to do. Like these procedural things that are included here is also just a JSON file. I think I'm going to wait until Epic has released more documentation about this because I don't feel like reverse engineering that JSON file. It was pretty big. It's not that hard, but uh just take a look at these uh this data asset for example, and you can find out the JSON directory here. And this is in kind of the same directories from this plug-in. So, take a look there in case you want to mess around with that. And you can probably get that working as well. And make sure to tag me or something if you do. Yeah. So, that's kind of the future what I'm thinking. You have everything you need to make custom trees. Maybe somebody can create a plug-in for Blender. I'm not sure I'm going to do it. And uh make sure you subscribe. This took a lot of effort, so please please please. All right, have a nice one.",
